README.md, before:

# Using an ESP-01 for WiFi on an Arduino UNO

The ESP-01, or ESP8266-01, is a minimalist ESP8266 device with just enough I/Os to use a a WiFi "shield" for an Arduino UNO.  The ESP8266 is made by Espressif Systems.
It's not a shield in the traditional UNO sense as it doesn't stack nicely on top an UNO like other shields, and it's a 3.3V device, not a 5V device like most other devices in the UNO ecosystem.

The ESP-01 has a serial port (TX/RX pins) that can be used to communicate with the Arduino UNO.
The UNO has a single hardware serial port (the pins labelled TX/RX) that is shared with the USB port.  If the serial monitor is used in the Arduino IDE to read messages from the UNO, the hardware port can't be used to communicate with other devices.

Instead, the SoftwareSerial library can be used to communicate with the ESP-01. Any 2 GPIO pins on the UNO can be used as TX and RX lines.

The ESP-01 takes instructions to connect to WiFi networks and transmit and receive data using AT commands sent over the serial port.  AT commands are short plain-text instructions that start with the string, AT.
AT commands to control the ESP-01 can be written directly to it on the serial port, but that requires knowledge of the command set and low level network communications.  It is much easier to use a pre-built library to do the work.
Two of those libraries are WiFiEsp and WiFiEspAT.
WiFiEspAT is the more modern library.
It requires version 1.7.4 or greater of the Espressif firmware.

The first task was to identify the firmware version running on the ESP-01.
An Arduino UNO was used to communicate with the ESP-01.
The connections were are follows:

| ESP-01 | Arduino UNO |
|:------:|:-----------:|
| 3V3    | 3V3         |
| RX     | RX          |
| RST    | NC          |
| IO0    | NC          |
| EN     | 3V3         |
| IO2    | NC          |
| TX     | TX          |
| GND    | GND         |

In addition, RESET on the Arduino was connected to GND.
This prevents the CPU on the UNO from starting and allows the UNO to be used as a basic USB-to serial converter.
The TX pin on the Arduino will send pulses to the ESP-01 at 5V.
The ESP-01 is 5V tolerant on the GPIO pins.
It is not tolerant on the power pins.
This comes from a reply to a facebook post in 2016 from the CEO of Espressif:
https://www.facebook.com/groups/1499045113679103/permalink/1731855033731442/.

See the photo and wiring diagrams below for the firmware version check layout.

| | | |
|:----:|:----:|:----:|
|![Photo of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/direct_connection_photo.jpg)| ![Fritzing illustration of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/flash_esp_bb.png) |![Fritzing schematic of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/flash_esp_schem.png)|

<!--
![Photo of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/direct_connection_photo.jpg)
![Fritzing illustration of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/flash_esp_bb.png)
![Fritzing schematic of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/flash_esp_schem.png)
-->

The Arduino IDE was used to query the ESP-01:
Connect the UNO into a USB port on a PC.
Open the serial monitor in the IDE.
Set the baud rate to 115200 and line ending to "Both NL & CR".
Type "AT" into the console and wait for the "OK" response.  Type in capitals only.
Type "AT+GMR" and wait for the response.  An example is shown below.

```
01:02:11.439 -> ⸮^X⸮AT

01:02:14.082 -> 
01:02:14.082 -> OK
01:02:17.541 -> AT+GMR

01:02:17.541 -> AT version:0.40.0.0(Aug  8 2015 14:45:58)
01:02:17.541 -> SDK version:1.3.0
01:02:17.541 -> Ai-Thinker Technology Co.,Ltd.
01:02:17.541 -> Build:1.3.0.2 Sep 11 2015 11:48:04
01:02:17.575 -> OK
```

In this case, the firmware version is 0.40.0.0 from SDK 1.3.0.

An alternative method of finding the firmware version is to install the WiFiEspAT library and use the CheckFirmware sketch to find the version.

To upgrade to firmare 1.7.4, do the following:
1. Download the firmware from the Espressif github page
2. With the Arduino powered off, Connect GPIO0 to GND on the ESP-01, in addition to the wiring above.
3. Plug the Arduino into the PC
4. Check that we can communicate with the ESP-01
5. Flash the firmware
6. Power off the Arduino (unplug) and disconnect GPIO0 from GND on the ESP-01
7. Power the Arduino back on
8. Check the version

## Get the firmware:
Go to the
[Espressif GitHub page for ESP8266 firmware](https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK "Espressif GitHub").
Select the 3.0.4 firmware branch by clicking on the 'master' dropdown, clicking on the 'Tags' menu, and selecting v3.0.4.

![ESP8266 NONOS SDK 3.0.4 selection](images/github_tag_v3.0.4.png)

Download the following files:
1. boot_v1.7.bin
2. at/512+512/user1.1024.new.2.bin
3. blank.bin
4. esp_init_data_default_v08.bin

Alternatively, download a zip file containing the four files from here:
[downloads/v1.7.4.zip](downloads/v1.7.4.zip)

Download the Espressif flash tool from
<https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-test-tools/en/latest/esp32/production_stage/tools/flash_download_tool.html>.
Click on the 'Flash Download Tool' link under 'Software' to get it.

Alternatively, get a local copy from here:
[downloads/flash_tool.zip](downloads/v1.7.4.zip)

Run the flash tool and confirm that it can communicate with the ESP-01.  
![Screenshot of Flash Tool](images/flash_tool_chip_info.png)

Select the 'chipInfoDump' tab, select the device port, and click on the 'Chip Info' button.
If the communication is successful, the detection information will appear in the log window.

Select the 'SPIDownload' tab to flash the new firmware.
Set the SPI SPEED to 40Mhz
Set SPI MODE to QIO
Untick 'DoNotChgBin'

Flash in the following order:

|  File | Address |
|:------|-----------:|
| boot_v1.7.bin | 0x0 |
| at/512+512/user1.1024.new.2.bin | 0x01000 |
| blank.bin | 0xfb000 |
|esp_init_data_default_v08.bin | 0xfc000 |
| blank.bin | 0xfe000 |
| blank.bin | 0x7e000 |


The filenames and addresses come from README.md in the 'at' folder of the Espressif GitHub page.

A screenshot of the flashing in progess is here:
![Screenshot of flashing in progress](images/flash_in_progress.png)

When the flashing is complete, the flash tool will print a status message:
![Screenshot of flashing complete](images/flash_complete.png)

The upgrade can be tested with the Arduino IDE.
Close the flash tool.
Unplug the Arduino from the PC.  Disconnect the cable from GPIO0 on the ESP-01 to GND.
Plug the Arduino back in.
Run the Arduino IDE and open the serial monitor.
Set the line ending to "Both NL & CR".  Set the baud rate to 115200.
Check the firmware version with AT commands.
An example of the output is shown below.

```
21:18:31.381 -> ?AT
21:18:36.490 -> 
21:18:36.490 -> OK
21:18:44.132 -> AT+GMR
21:18:44.132 -> AT version:1.7.4.0(May 11 2020 19:13:04)
21:18:44.132 -> SDK version:3.0.4(9532ceb)
21:18:44.132 -> compile time:May 27 2020 10:12:17
21:18:44.132 -> Bin version(Wroom 02):1.7.4
```



Now the wiring can be changed to allow the Arduino UNO to use the ESP-01.
Unplug the UNO.
Move the TX cable on the UNO to pin 6.
Move the RX cable on the UNO to pin 7.
Disconnect the cable between RESET and GND on the UNO.
Plug the UNO back in.

| ESP-01 | Arduino UNO |
|:------:|:-----------:|
| 3V3    | 3V3         |
| RX     | 7           |
| RST    | NC          |
| IO0    | NC          |
| EN     | 3V3         |
| IO2    | NC          |
| TX     | 6           |
| GND    | GND         |

| Arduino UNO | Arduino UNO |
|:-----------:|:-----------:|
| RESET       | NC          |

Open the Arduino IDE.
Install the WiFiEspAT library.
Tools -> Manage Libraries...
Search for WiFiEspAT and install.

![Screenshot of WiFiEspAT library install](images/wifiespat.png)

Use the WiFiEspAT example sketches for testing.
Open the serial monitor on the Arduino IDE, set the serial port speed to 115200 baud
and the line endings to Newline.

The SoftwareSerial library documentation
(https://docs.arduino.cc/learn/built-in-libraries/software-serial/)
says that the maximum speed for Arduino boards is 57600 baud.
However, the documentation for WiFiEspAT at https://github.com/jandrassy/WiFiEspAT
recommends using 9600 baud with SoftwareSerial.
So, the first thing to do is change the baud rate on the ESP-01 from the default 115200
to 9600.
This can be done with a sketch called 'ChangeATBaudRate' which is included in the WiFiEspAT library examples:

![Screenshot of ChangeATBaudRate in menus](images/change_baud_rate_example.png)



Test with my code

Commit message:

Add instructions to check the firmware with the CheckFirmware sketch. Include example output.

README.md, after:

# Using an ESP-01 for WiFi on an Arduino UNO

The ESP-01, or ESP8266-01, is a minimalist ESP8266 device with just enough I/Os to use a a WiFi "shield" for an Arduino UNO.  The ESP8266 is made by Espressif Systems.
It's not a shield in the traditional UNO sense as it doesn't stack nicely on top an UNO like other shields, and it's a 3.3V device, not a 5V device like most other devices in the UNO ecosystem.

The ESP-01 has a serial port (TX/RX pins) that can be used to communicate with the Arduino UNO.
The UNO has a single hardware serial port (the pins labelled TX/RX) that is shared with the USB port.  If the serial monitor is used in the Arduino IDE to read messages from the UNO, the hardware port can't be used to communicate with other devices.

Instead, the SoftwareSerial library can be used to communicate with the ESP-01. Any 2 GPIO pins on the UNO can be used as TX and RX lines.

The ESP-01 takes instructions to connect to WiFi networks and transmit and receive data using AT commands sent over the serial port.  AT commands are short plain-text instructions that start with the string, AT.
AT commands to control the ESP-01 can be written directly to it on the serial port, but that requires knowledge of the command set and low level network communications.  It is much easier to use a pre-built library to do the work.
Two of those libraries are WiFiEsp and WiFiEspAT.
WiFiEspAT is the more modern library.
It requires version 1.7.4 or greater of the Espressif firmware.

The first task was to identify the firmware version running on the ESP-01.
An Arduino UNO was used to communicate with the ESP-01.
The connections were are follows:

| ESP-01 | Arduino UNO |
|:------:|:-----------:|
| 3V3    | 3V3         |
| RX     | RX          |
| RST    | NC          |
| IO0    | NC          |
| EN     | 3V3         |
| IO2    | NC          |
| TX     | TX          |
| GND    | GND         |

In addition, RESET on the Arduino was connected to GND.
This prevents the CPU on the UNO from starting and allows the UNO to be used as a basic USB-to serial converter.
The TX pin on the Arduino will send pulses to the ESP-01 at 5V.
The ESP-01 is 5V tolerant on the GPIO pins.
It is not tolerant on the power pins.
This comes from a reply to a facebook post in 2016 from the CEO of Espressif:
https://www.facebook.com/groups/1499045113679103/permalink/1731855033731442/.

See the photo and wiring diagrams below for the firmware version check layout.

| | | |
|:----:|:----:|:----:|
|![Photo of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/direct_connection_photo.jpg)| ![Fritzing illustration of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/flash_esp_bb.png) |![Fritzing schematic of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/flash_esp_schem.png)|

<!--
![Photo of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/direct_connection_photo.jpg)
![Fritzing illustration of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/flash_esp_bb.png)
![Fritzing schematic of ESP-01 configuration for firmware check](images/flash_esp_schem.png)
-->

The Arduino IDE was used to query the ESP-01:
Connect the UNO into a USB port on a PC.
Open the serial monitor in the IDE.
Set the baud rate to 115200 and line ending to "Both NL & CR".
Type "AT" into the console and wait for the "OK" response.  Type in capitals only.
Type "AT+GMR" and wait for the response.  An example is shown below.

```
01:02:11.439 -> ⸮^X⸮AT

01:02:14.082 -> 
01:02:14.082 -> OK
01:02:17.541 -> AT+GMR

01:02:17.541 -> AT version:0.40.0.0(Aug  8 2015 14:45:58)
01:02:17.541 -> SDK version:1.3.0
01:02:17.541 -> Ai-Thinker Technology Co.,Ltd.
01:02:17.541 -> Build:1.3.0.2 Sep 11 2015 11:48:04
01:02:17.575 -> OK
```

In this case, the firmware version is 0.40.0.0 from SDK 1.3.0.

An alternative method of finding the firmware version is to install the WiFiEspAT library and use the CheckFirmware sketch to find the version.

To upgrade to firmare 1.7.4, do the following:
1. Download the firmware from the Espressif github page
2. With the Arduino powered off, Connect GPIO0 to GND on the ESP-01, in addition to the wiring above.
3. Plug the Arduino into the PC
4. Check that we can communicate with the ESP-01
5. Flash the firmware
6. Power off the Arduino (unplug) and disconnect GPIO0 from GND on the ESP-01
7. Power the Arduino back on
8. Check the version

## Get the firmware:
Go to the
[Espressif GitHub page for ESP8266 firmware](https://github.com/espressif/ESP8266_NONOS_SDK "Espressif GitHub").
Select the 3.0.4 firmware branch by clicking on the 'master' dropdown, clicking on the 'Tags' menu, and selecting v3.0.4.

![ESP8266 NONOS SDK 3.0.4 selection](images/github_tag_v3.0.4.png)

Download the following files:
1. boot_v1.7.bin
2. at/512+512/user1.1024.new.2.bin
3. blank.bin
4. esp_init_data_default_v08.bin

Alternatively, download a zip file containing the four files from here:
[downloads/v1.7.4.zip](downloads/v1.7.4.zip)

Download the Espressif flash tool from
<https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-test-tools/en/latest/esp32/production_stage/tools/flash_download_tool.html>.
Click on the 'Flash Download Tool' link under 'Software' to get it.

Alternatively, get a local copy from here:
[downloads/flash_tool.zip](downloads/v1.7.4.zip)

Run the flash tool and confirm that it can communicate with the ESP-01.  
![Screenshot of Flash Tool](images/flash_tool_chip_info.png)

Select the 'chipInfoDump' tab, select the device port, and click on the 'Chip Info' button.
If the communication is successful, the detection information will appear in the log window.

Select the 'SPIDownload' tab to flash the new firmware.
Set the SPI SPEED to 40Mhz
Set SPI MODE to QIO
Untick 'DoNotChgBin'

Flash in the following order:

|  File | Address |
|:------|-----------:|
| boot_v1.7.bin | 0x0 |
| at/512+512/user1.1024.new.2.bin | 0x01000 |
| blank.bin | 0xfb000 |
|esp_init_data_default_v08.bin | 0xfc000 |
| blank.bin | 0xfe000 |
| blank.bin | 0x7e000 |


The filenames and addresses come from README.md in the 'at' folder of the Espressif GitHub page.

A screenshot of the flashing in progess is here:
![Screenshot of flashing in progress](images/flash_in_progress.png)

When the flashing is complete, the flash tool will print a status message:
![Screenshot of flashing complete](images/flash_complete.png)

The upgrade can be tested with the Arduino IDE.
Close the flash tool.
Unplug the Arduino from the PC.  Disconnect the cable from GPIO0 on the ESP-01 to GND.
Plug the Arduino back in.
Run the Arduino IDE and open the serial monitor.
Set the line ending to "Both NL & CR".  Set the baud rate to 115200.
Check the firmware version with AT commands.
An example of the output is shown below.

```
21:18:31.381 -> ?AT
21:18:36.490 -> 
21:18:36.490 -> OK
21:18:44.132 -> AT+GMR
21:18:44.132 -> AT version:1.7.4.0(May 11 2020 19:13:04)
21:18:44.132 -> SDK version:3.0.4(9532ceb)
21:18:44.132 -> compile time:May 27 2020 10:12:17
21:18:44.132 -> Bin version(Wroom 02):1.7.4
```



Now the wiring can be changed to allow the Arduino UNO to use the ESP-01.
Unplug the UNO.
Move the TX cable on the UNO to pin 6.
Move the RX cable on the UNO to pin 7.
Disconnect the cable between RESET and GND on the UNO.
Plug the UNO back in.

| ESP-01 | Arduino UNO |
|:------:|:-----------:|
| 3V3    | 3V3         |
| RX     | 7           |
| RST    | NC          |
| IO0    | NC          |
| EN     | 3V3         |
| IO2    | NC          |
| TX     | 6           |
| GND    | GND         |

| Arduino UNO | Arduino UNO |
|:-----------:|:-----------:|
| RESET       | NC          |

Open the Arduino IDE.
Install the WiFiEspAT library.
Tools -> Manage Libraries...
Search for WiFiEspAT and install.

![Screenshot of WiFiEspAT library install](images/wifiespat.png)

Use the WiFiEspAT example sketches for testing.
Open the serial monitor on the Arduino IDE, set the serial port speed to 115200 baud
and the line endings to Newline.

The SoftwareSerial library documentation
(https://docs.arduino.cc/learn/built-in-libraries/software-serial/)
says that the maximum speed for Arduino boards is 57600 baud.
However, the documentation for WiFiEspAT at https://github.com/jandrassy/WiFiEspAT
recommends using 9600 baud with SoftwareSerial.
So, the first thing to do is change the baud rate on the ESP-01 from the default 115200
to 9600.
This can be done with a sketch called 'ChangeATBaudRate' which is included in the WiFiEspAT library examples:

![Screenshot of ChangeATBaudRate in menus](images/change_baud_rate_example.png)

Run the sketch to change the ESP-01 baud rate to 9600.

Load and run the 'CheckFirmware' sketch from the same menu to confirm that the new
firmware will work with the WiFiEspAT library.
An example of the output on the Serial Monitor is shown below.

```
00:06:38.293 -> ⸮q⸮AT firmware version 1.7.4.0
00:06:40.294 -> AT firmware is OK for the WiFiEspAT library.
00:07:15.273 -> AT firmware version 1.7.4.0
00:07:15.273 -> AT firmware is OK for the WiFiEspAT library.
```


Test with my code
